The need to share understanding in order to survive as an individual and as a species means
that when a person ’s way of perceiving the world is unfamiliar to us we can feel threatened
and uncertain as to how to respond to them (Eminson 2004).
Media, mental illness and stigma
There is a dearth of research which focuses speci ﬁcally on how mental illness is depicted in the
children ’s and young persons ’ media (Wahl 2002). This is despite suggestions that such media12 Nursing in child and adolescent mental healthprovide the means by which young people will derive a preliminary understanding of mental
illness. Participants in a small-scale local study identi ﬁed some positive and accurate represen-
tations in the media. These included the Jacqueline Wilson books, the ﬁlm A Beautiful Mind  and
Channel 4 documentaries (Leighton 2006). Byrne (2003) discusses examples in soap operaswhen television can perform a major public service where care is taken over how mental illnessis portrayed. One suspects that the converse is also true – that when care is not taken the
damage done to those suffering with mental illness can be immense.
Two large-scale literature reviews have suggested that the media can be regarded as an
important in ﬂuence on community attitudes towards mental illness. It is considered that
there is a complex and circular relationship between mass media representation of mentalillness and public understanding, with negative media images promoting negative attitudesand resultant media coverage feeding off an already negative public perception. It is alsothought that negative images will have a greater effect on public attitudes than positive por-trayals (Francis et al.  2001; Edney 2004). Work by Wahl (2003) suggests that this is equally
applicable to children.
Consequences of stigma
Stigmatization of the mentally ill is understood to be prejudicial to them, injurious to all aspectsof their treatment in mental health services and damaging to their role as members of society(Hinshaw 2005). Stigmatization leads to individual and social discrimination against the stig-matized person. Several authors identify that the discriminatory behaviour displayed can behostile or avoidant and that it operates throughout personal and social relationships, pervadingthe home, workplace, local community, health and social welfare systems. This can result inincreased feelings of shame, increased personal and social impairment and isolation, perpetu-ation and worsening of an illness, reluctance to access health care and infringement of humanrights (Link and Phelan 2001; Crisp 2004; Hinshaw 2005).
Children, mental illness and stigma
There is also a scarcity of research examining the issue of stigma in relation to children andmental illness (Wahl 2002; Hinshaw 2005). As described previously, the high prevalence ofmental health problems in young people and their reluctance to access specialist services givescause for concern. The indications are that children develop negative attitudes towards thosewith mental illness early on (Gale 2007). Additionally, adolescents are the adults of the futureand therefore their beliefs and attitudes regarding mental health and illness will affect servicedevelopment, the quality of life of those experiencing mental health problems and the help-seeking behaviour of individuals (Armstrong et al. 2000; Hinshaw 2005).
Box 1.2 highlights themes identi ﬁed from work which focused on adolescents, mental illness
and stigma, albeit to varying degrees and using different methods.
Box 1.2 Themes associated with mental illness and stigma identi ﬁed
by adolescents
•Negative attitudes towards groups described as deviant – for example, the mentally
ill – were apparent by kindergarten and increased with age (Weiss 1986, 1994;
Wahl 2002).Deﬁning mental health and mental illness 13•Words and phrases used to describe people with mental health problems or
mental illness were largely derogatory, with the most common labels being‘retarded ’, ‘psycho(path) ’, ‘spastic ’, ‘mental ’, ‘crazy ’ and ‘nutter ’ (Bailey 1999;
Pinfold et al. 2003).
•The most frequently cited causes of mental illness were stress, genetics and bad
childhood experiences (Bailey 1999).
•Y oung people with experience of mental health problems described being met
with negative attitudes and reactions from other people, including professionals(Scottish Executive 2005).
•Although adolescents stigmatized peers with both physical and mental illness,
they had a greater tendency to stigmatize those experiencing a mental illness(Sessa 2005a, 2005b).
•Adolescents presenting in school with either a physical or mental illness were
likely to be socially excluded, itself a risk factor for developing mental healthproblems (Sessa 2005a, 2005b).
•Providing mental health education could lead to a positive change in reported
attitudes in the short term, especially among females and those reporting personalcontact with someone who had a mental illness (Pinfold et al. 2003).
•Although adolescents with less knowledge about mental health and illness had
more negative attitudes towards mental illness, this did not in ﬂuence the willing-
ness to seek help for mental health problems as much as other factors – for
example, level of psychological distress, number of barriers to overcome in orderto access help, or adaptability (Shef ﬁeld et al. 2004).
From the sparse literature available, it would appear that adolescents ’ attitudes towards
mental illness tend to be negative and stigmatizing. The need for education among the public,and adolescents in particular, in order to combat the stigma of mental illness is highlightedin the literature (Davidson and Manion 1996; Armstrong et al.  1998; Esters et al.  1998;
Bailey 1999; Secker et al.  1999; Taylor 2001; Naylor et al.  2002; Pow 2003; Hinshaw 2005;
Sessa 2005b).
Early indicators from our own work in Nigeria are that such attitudes transcend culture
(Dogra 2009). However, there is evidence that stigma can be tackled. We will now examinesome of the interventions undertaken to reduce stigma among children.
Interventions to reduce stigma
Large-scale interventions, such as high pro ﬁle campaigns, are often dif ﬁcult to evaluate. In the
UK there have been several such campaigns – for example, The Royal College of Psychiatrists ’
campaign, ‘Every Family in the Land ’ (Crisp 2004) and the WHO ‘Dare to Care ’ campaign
(WHO 2001). There is little evidence available to indicate that these have successfully changedpublic or personal attitudes, although there is evidence that more targeted initiatives may reapbene ﬁts (WHO 2005a). While much of the work to date has focused on adults, there are increas-
ing efforts to address the issue among younger populations.
There is scope for joint working between schools and child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) in order to provide mental health promotion and reduce stigma. However,it is important that we do not attempt to reduce stigma by just changing the terminology used,as there is no evidence that such strategies work.
One small-scale local study found that young people thought they might be helped by14 Nursing in child and adolescent mental healthhaving more basic information about local services (Dogra et al.  2007). In another such study,
adolescents who lived with parental mental illness suggested that the best ways of providingadolescents with information about mental health included real experience and focusing onthe issue in schools – i.e. existing sources of (mis)information. It was thought that those speak-
ing out should be adolescents who were con ﬁdent to talk about their situation, but they should
not talk to people they knew for fear of being bullied and they should be pupils at other schools(Leighton 2006).
Two school-based interventions reported promising results. Rahman et al.  (1998) concluded
that the school programme they undertook was successful in improving mental health aware-ness in the children and their community. Unfortunately, the intervention is only brie ﬂy
described and it is dif ﬁcult to be clear whether attitudes towards mental health (and issues
about stigma) were addressed, or whether awareness of mental health (and therefore knowledgeand understanding) informed the intervention. More recently, Pinfold et al.  (2003) undertook
short educational workshops with 472 secondary school children in the UK. Changes weremost marked for female students and those who had personal contact with people with mentalhealth problems. Further analysis of the labels used to stigmatize people with mental illnessfound that of the 472 students sampled, 400 of them provided 250 words to describe a personwith mental illness. Nearly half were derogatory (Rose et al.  2007). The authors conclude that
there need to be interventions which address factual information about mental illness andthat reduce the strong negative emotional reactions to people with mental illness. Effectiveevaluation is unlikely to be possible if there is no clarity about the purpose of the interventionor too many aspects covered in one evaluation (Naylor et al. 2002).
Summary
Considerable terminological confusion exists in relation to issues associated with mental health
generally and among children and young people speci ﬁcally. Furthermore, stigmatizing atti-
tudes towards mental illness and related issues continue to pose a challenge. Children, youngpeople and adults display similar negative attitudes towards both mental illness and individualsexperiencing mental health problems or illness. However, there is some evidence that thesemight be amenable to interventions such as education.
You may now wish to re ﬂect on the issues discussed in this chapter by returning to the
exercise in Box 1.1.
References
American Psychiatric Association (1994) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , 4th edn.
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.