See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/255657987
Deﬁning mental health and mental illness
Article  · Januar y 2009
CITATIONS
9READS
141,176
2 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
Cultural P sychiatr y View pr oject
Diversifying the medic al curriculum  View pr oject
Nisha Dogr a
Univ ersity of L eicester
152 PUBLICA TIONS    2,847  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Nisha Dogr a on 20 May 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.Deﬁning mental health and
mental illness
Sharon Leighton and Nisha Dogra
Key features Discussion of the terminological confusion that exists in relation to issues
associated with mental health.
The scale of individual suffering from mental health problems and illness
among young people.
The worldwide phenomenon of the stigmatization of mental illness,
originating during childhood.
Evidence regarding interventions to reduce stigma.
Introduction
In this chapter we explore the concepts of mental health and mental illness from different
perspectives, including those relating to children, and of children. This is important as thosewho work in mental health, or are familiar with the ﬁeld, often make the assumption that the
terms used are readily understood by others. The scale of the problem and access to services isoutlined. We then discuss stigma generally, explore the reasons for it and possible sequelae, andthen consider how this relates to children. Finally, interventions to reduce stigma are brie ﬂy
presented. As mentioned in the Introduction, where possible we have referred speci ﬁcally to the
literature relating to children but where this is limited we have drawn from the wider literatureto highlight key issues.
The chapter begins with an exercise which provides a practical context for the theoretical
content and should be borne in mind as you read, and answered once you have ﬁnished the
chapter.
Box 1.1
Exercise
General questions
 What words or images do you associate with the following terms:
 Mental health
 Mental health problems Mental illness Mental disorder
 What sorts of problems do people experience that could be described as mental
health problems or mental illness?
 How would you be able to tell if someone was experiencing mental health prob-
lems or mental illness?1Case scenarios and associated questions
Please read each senario and then consider the following questions in relation to it:
What do you think might be happening with the young person?
Do you think the young person has a mental health problem or illness? If so, on
what grounds would you justify that decision?
Do they need help?
If so, who and/or what might be helpful?
How might this be helpful?
Case scenario 1
Jack, aged 9, lives with his mother and younger brother. His father unexpectedly left the
family a year ago. Jack started a new school six months ago and is having difﬁcultysettling in. He complains of tummy ache each school morning and is increasinglyreluctant to attend.
Case scenario 2
Emily, aged 14, lives with her parents, who are both busy professionals. She works hard,achieves A-grades and plans to be a lawyer. Recently she has been teased by herfriends about her weight and has decided to go on a strict diet. She is pleased with theresults so far and plans to continue eating little, making herself sick after meals andexercising a lot.
Case scenario 3
Joshua, aged 15, lives with his dad and stepmother. He has little contact with his mum oryounger brother and sister. Recently he has been cautioned by the police for joy-ridingin stolen cars with his mates. He prefers to spend time smoking dope with older boysrather than going to school.
Deﬁning mental health and mental illness
Clarity is essential when using the terms ‘mental health ’ and ‘mental illness ’. In all phases of a
recent small-scale research project, conceptual confusion was identi ﬁed in the literature review
and among participants (Leighton 2008). Ironically, referring to mental illness in terms ofmental health originated in the 1960s in an attempt to reduce stigma (Rowling et al.  2002).
There is no widely agreed consensus on the meaning of these terms and their use. Mental healthand mental illness can be perceived as two separate, yet related, issues.
Ryff and Singer (1998) suggest that health is not a medical concept associated with absence
of illness, but rather a philosophical one that requires an explanation of a good life  – being one
where an individual has a sense of purpose, is engaged in quality relationships with others, andpossesses self-respect and mastery. This is synonymous with the World Health Organization(WHO) (2000, 2005b) de ﬁnition of positive mental health.
However, such a de ﬁnition is incomplete as individuals do not exist in isolation, but are
inﬂuenced by, and in ﬂuence, their social and physical environments. Furthermore, people will
have their own individual interpretations of what a good life  is. Rowling et al.  (2002: 13) de ﬁne
mental health as the8 Nursing in child and adolescent mental healthcapacity of individuals and groups to interact with one another and the environment in ways that
promote subjective wellbeing, the optimal development and use of cognitive, affective and relationalabilities, the achievement of individual and collective goals consistent with justice.
This is a more rounded de ﬁnition, and one that can coexist alongside the WHO (1992) de ﬁnition
of mental disorder.
Mental health – one of many factors
It is also important to recognize that neither physical nor mental health exist separately –
mental, physical and social functioning are interdependent (WHO 2004). Furthermore, allhealth issues need to be considered within a cultural and developmental context, as do thesocial constructs of childhood and adolescence (Walker 2005). The quality of a person ’s mental
health is in ﬂuenced by idiosyncratic factors and experiences, their family relationships and
circumstances and the wider community in which they live (WHO 2004). Additionally, eachculture in ﬂuences people ’s understanding of, and attitudes towards, mental health issues.
However, a culture-speci ﬁc approach to understanding and improving mental health can be
unhelpful if it assumes homogeneity within cultures and ignores individual differences (WHO2004). Culture is only one, albeit important, factor that in ﬂuences individuals ’ beliefs and
actions (Tomlinson 2001; Dogra 2003). Interaction between different factors may lead to differ-ent outcomes for different individuals.
It can be argued that the above approaches are rooted in western perspectives. However, they
provide a useful starting point from which to discuss mental health issues with children andtheir families.
Deﬁnitions of child mental health
Deﬁnitions of mental health as they relate speci ﬁcally to children have been provided by the
Health Advisory Service (HAS) (1995) and the Mental Health Foundation (1999). These def-initions bear similarities to those provided by Ryff and Singer (1998) and Rowling et al. (2002),
while recognizing the developmental context of childhood – i.e. the ability to develop psycho-
logically, emotionally, creatively, intellectually and spiritually; initiate, develop and sustainmutually satisfying personal relationships; use and enjoy solitude; become aware of others andempathize with them; play and learn; develop a sense of right and wrong; and resolve problemsand setbacks and learn from them (HAS 1995; Mental Health Foundation 1999). Such de ﬁnitions
are useful as they relate to ‘societal ’ expectations of children.
Different de ﬁnitions are used to de ﬁne mental ill health. The WHO uses the term ‘mental
disorders ’ broadly, to include mental illness, intellectual disability, personality disorder, sub-
stance dependence and adjustment to adverse life events (WHO 1992). The WHO acknowledgesthat the word ‘disorder ’ is used to avoid perceived greater dif ﬁculties associated with ‘illness ’ –
for example, stigma and the emphasis on a medical model. Meltzer et al.  (2000) use the term
‘mental disorders ’ in reference to emotional, conduct, hyperkinetic and less common disorders
as de ﬁned by the ICD (International Classi ﬁcation of Diseases) 10 and DSM ( Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ) IV. Jorm (2000) focuses speci ﬁcally on depression and
psychosis. Meanwhile, Rowling et al. (2002) use the terms ‘mental illness ’ and ‘mental disorder ’
interchangeably. Johns (2002) and the British Medical Association (BMA 2006) identify thatthe term ‘mental health problems ’ is used to cover a broad spectrum of conditions ranging
from diagnosable disorders such as anxiety and depression, through to acting out behaviours.The BMA (2006) also distinguish between mental disorders and illness, with illness being severepsychiatric disorders such as depression and psychosis.Deﬁning mental health and mental illness 9Others take a broader view. Rickwood et al.  (2005) refer to ‘young people ’s help-seeking for
mental health problems ’ and proceed to use various terms including ‘psychological distress ’,
‘mental health issues ’, ‘mental health problems ’ and ‘mental disorder ’. The interchangeable use
of these terms in effect renders them meaningless, as their use may re ﬂect an individual ’s bias,
or political correctness, rather than indicating the extent or severity of the problem. However,all identify alterations in mood, thinking and behaviour associated with distress or impairedfunctioning across various domains.
Entity or dimension?